# Chapter 2 - The Intuitive Dog and Its Rational Tail

## 2.1 Wilson's Prophecy

## 2.2 The Emotional Nineties

## 2.3 Why Atheists Won't Sell Their Souls

## 2.4 "Seeing-That" Versus "Reasoning-Why"

> Margolis thought that a better model for study higher cognition, such as political thinking
> , was lower cognition, such as vision, which works largely by rapid unconscious pattern matching.

example1
> Muller-lyer illusion

example2
> Wason 4-card task
> : each card comes from a deck in which all cards have a letter on one side and a number on the other.
> Your task is to choose the smallest number of cards that you must turn over to decide whether this rule is true:
>   "If there is a vowel on one side, then there is an even number on the other side."

by contraposition, `p -> q` ~ `not q -> not p`
"If there is no even number (there is an odd number) on one side, then there is no vowel on the other side."

> the correct answer for `E K 4 7` is to flip `E` and `7`.

> Everyone immediately sees that you have to turn over the `E`
> , but many people also say you need to turn over the `4`.
> They seem to be doing simple-minded pattern matching
> : There was a vowel and an even number in the question
>   , so let's turn over the vowel and the even number.

> When people are told up front what the answer is and asked to explain why that answer is correct, they can do it.
> But amazingly, they are just as able to offer an explanation
> , and just as confident in their reasoning
> , whether they are told the right answer (`E` and `7`)
>   or the popular but wrong answer (`E` and `4`).

> Findings such as these led Wason to the conclusion that
>   **judgment** and **justification** are separate processes.
> Margolis shared Wason's view, summarizing the state of affairs like this:
>   Given the judgments (themselves produced by the non-conscious cognitive machinery in the brain, sometimes correctly, sometimes not so)
>   , human beings produce rationales they believe account for their judgments.
>   But the rationales (on this argument) are only ex post rationalizations.

Intuitive Pattern Matching vs Logical Reasoning

> “Seeing-that” is the pattern matching that brains have been doing for hundreds of millions of years. 
> Even the simplest animals are wired to 
>   respond to certain patterns of input (such as light, or sugar) 
>   with specific behaviors (such as turning away from the light, or stopping and eating the sugary food).
> Animals easily learn new patterns and connect them up to their existing behaviors, which can be reconfigured into new patterns as well (as when an animal trainer teaches an elephant a new trick).

> “Reasoning-why,” in contrast, is the process 
>   “by which we describe how we think we reached a judgment
>   , or how we think another person could reach that judgment.”
> “Reasoning-why” can occur only for creatures that 
>   have language 
>   and a need to explain themselves to other creatures.
> “Reasoning-why” is not automatic
> ; it’s conscious, it sometimes feels like work
>   , and it’s easily disrupted by cognitive load. 
> Kohlberg had convinced moral psychologists to study “reasoning-why” and to neglect “seeing-that.”

> Margolis’s ideas were a perfect fit with everything I had seen in my studies: 
>   rapid intuitive judgment (“That’s just wrong!”) 
>   followed by slow and sometimes tortuous justifications (“Well, their two methods of birth control might fail, and the kids they produce might be deformed”).
> The intuition launched the reasoning, but the intuition did not depend on the success or failure of the reasoning.
> My harmless-taboo stories (stories about people who do offensive things, but do them in such a way that nobody is harmed) 
> were like Muller-Lyer illusions: 
>   they still felt wrong, even after you had measured the amount of harm involved and agreed that the stories were harmless.

Because it's against their intuition and consumes more of their cognitive resource and requires well-trained critical thinking and minimal background knowledge to follow and appreciate the moral reasoning.

Lines in Muller-Lyer illusions are easily measurable by commonly accessible tools like rulers or meters, and we already established a common sense that those tools are better sources of truth than our bare eyes thus we can agree upon the measurement without conflicts.

But harmless-taboo stories are rarely observable (partially because they are artificial) thus normal people have no experience of such and no moral reasoning has been conducted around those scenarios throughout their lives.
Their first responses relying on their intuitive pattern matching (similar to K-nearest neighbor search) is totally reasonable.
And the more complex the scenario is (in terms of the number of interest groups involved, economically and culturally) the harder people can draw consensus upon possible responses.
That's why we need professional policy makers who can think of the problems in the eye of the entire population and balance out all different interests with a historical perspective.


> We do moral reasoning 
>   not to reconstruct the actual reasons why we ourselves came to a judgment
>   ; we reason to find the best possible reasons 
>     why somebody else ought to join us in our judgment.
