# Chapter 5 - Beyond WEIRD Morality

> Are Norenzayan published a profoundly important article titled "The Weirdest Peope in the World?"
> The author pointed out that nearly all research in psychology is conducted on a very small subset of the human population
> : people from cultures that are Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic (forming the acronym WEIRD).
> They then reviewed dozens of studies showing that WEIRD people are statistical outliers
> ; they are the least typical, least representative people you could study if you want to make generalization about human nature.
> Even within the West
> , Americans are more extreme outliers than Europeans
> , and within the United States, the educated upper middle class (like my Penn sample) is the most unusual of all.

example previously stated: students from University of Pennsylvania
> they were the only group that frequently ignored their own feelings of disgust and said that an action that bothered them was nonetheless morally permissible.
> they were the only group in which a majority (73 percent) were able to tolerate the chicken story.

a moral test from chapter 1
> A man goes to the supermarket once a week and buys a chicken. But before cooking the chicken, he has sexual intercourse with it. Then he cooks it and eats it.

reflection of 
Western Individualism vs Eastern Collectivism

> Several of the peculiarities of WEIRD culture can be captured in this simple generalization
> : The WEIRDer you are, the more you see a world full of separate objects, rather than relationships.
> It has long been reported that Westerners have a more independent and autonomous concept of the self than do East Asians.

example1
> when asked to write twenty statements beginning with the words "I am ..."
> , Americans are likely to list their own internal psychological characteristics
> , whereas East Asians are more likely to list their roles and relationships.

example2: difference in visual perception
> The differences run deep; even visual perception is affected.
> shown a square with a line drawn inside it,
> to draw a line that is the same as the line you saw on the previous page
> , either in absolute terms (same number of centimeters)
> , or in relative terms (same proportion relative to the frame).
> Westerners, and particularly Americans, excel at the absolute task
> , because they saw the line as an independent object in the first place
> , and store it separately in memory
> East Asians, in contrast, outperform Americans at the relative task
> , because they automatically perceived and remembered the relationship among the parts.

difference in thinking style
> Most people think holistically (seeing the whole context and the relationships among parts)
> , but WEIRD people think more analytically (detaching the focal object from its context, assigning it to a category, and then assuming that what's true about the category is true about the object).

conclusion
> If WEIRD and non-WEIRD people think differently and see the world differently
> , then it stands to reason that they'd have different moral concerns.

> it makes sense that WEIRD philosophers since Kant and Mill have mostly generated moral systems that are 
>   individualistic, rule-based, and universalist.
> When holistic thinkers in a non-WEIRD culture write about morality, we get something more like the Analects of Confucius
> , a collection of aphorisms and anecdotes that can't be reduced to a single rule.
> Confucius talks about a variety of relationship-specific duties and virtues.

> Western morality protects those individuals and their individual rights.
>   It emphasizes concerns about harm and fairness.
> Eastern morality focuses more on relationships, contexts, groups, and institutions.
>   Eastern people place the needs of groups and institutions first, often ahead of the needs of individuals.
>   Then a morality based on concerns about harm and fairness won't be sufficient.
>   You'll have additional concerns, and you'll need additional virtues to bind people together.
