# Chapter 1 The Necessity of Politics

## 2.0 Intro

## 2.1 Political Anxieties

## 2.2 Political Decay

## 2.3 Fantasies of Statelessness

## 2.4 Getting to Denmark

> Most people living in rich, stable developed countries
>   have no idea how Denmark itself got to be Denmark—something that is true for many Danes as well.
> The struggle to create modern political institutions was so long and so painful that people living in industrialized countries now suffer from a historical amnesia regarding how their societies came to that point in the first place.

> Some degree of accountability was present in many traditional monarchies, but it was usually the product of informal consultation with a small body of elite advisers.
> Modern democracy was born when rulers
>   acceded to formal rules limiting their power
>   and subordinating their sovereignty to the will of the larger population
>     as expressed through elections.

> The three categories of institutions in question are the ones just described:
> 1. the state
>   - The state, after all, concentrates and uses power, to bring about compliance with its laws on the part of its citizens and to defend itself against other states and threats.
> 2. the rule of law
> 3. accountable government
>   - The rule of law and accountable government, on the other hand, limit the state’s power, first by forcing it to use its power according to certain public and transparent rules, and then by ensuring that it is subordinate to the will of the people.

> These institutions come into being in the first place because people find that they can protect their interests, and the interests of their families, through them.
> But what people regard as self-interest, and how they are willing to collaborate with others, depends critically on ideas that legitimate certain forms of political association.
> **Self-interest** and **legitimacy** thus form the cornerstones of **political order**.
