# Chapter 2: The State of Nature

## 2.0 Historical Overview

> Rousseau was brilliantly correct in certain of his observations,
>   such as his view that human **inequality** had its origins
>   in the development of metallurgy, **agriculture**, and, above all, **private property**.

> But he, Hobbes, and Locke were wrong on one very important point. All three thinkers saw human beings in the state of nature as isolated individuals, for whom society was not natural.
> According to Hobbes, early human beings relate to one another primarily
>   through fear, envy, and conflict.
> Rousseau’s primitive human is even more isolated:
>   while sex is natural, the family is not.
> Mutual human dependence comes about almost accidentally,
>   as a result of technological innovations
>   like agriculture that require greater cooperation.
> For both, human society emerges only with the passage of historical time,
>   and involves compromises of natural liberty.

> Everything that modern biology and anthropology tell us about the state of nature suggests the opposite:
>   there was never a period in human evolution when human beings existed as isolated individuals;
>   the primate precursors of the human species had already developed extensive social, and indeed political, skills;
>   and the human brain is hardwired with faculties that facilitate many forms of social cooperation.

## 2.1 Chimpanzee Politics and Its Relevance to Human Political Development

> According to the archaeologist Steven LeBlanc, "Much of noncomplex society human **warfare** is similar to chimpanzee attacks.
> Massacres among humans at that social level are, in fact, rare occurrences,
>   and victory by attrition is a viable strategy, as are buffer zones, surprise raids, taking captive females into group, and mutilation of victims.
> The chimp and human behaviors are almost parallel."
> The primary difference is that human beings are more deadly because they are able to use a wider and more lethal suite of weapons.

> Chimpanzees defend their ranges like human groups do, but in other respects they are very different.
> Males and females do not come together in families to raise children;
>   they create separate male and female **hierarchies**.
> The politics of dominance within those hierarchies, however, is reminiscent of politics within human groups.

> While physical size and strength matter, **dominance** is ultimately achieved through an ability to **cooperate** with others.

> Once male or female chimps have achieved dominance within their respective hierarchies, they exercise what can only be described as **authority**,
>   the ability to settle conflicts and set **rules** based on their status within the hierarchy.

> Building coalitions in chimp society is not a straightforward process and requires something like an ability to **judge character**.
> Like humans, chimps are capable of deception and have to evaluate potential allies for their trustworthiness.
> Longtime observers of chimp behavior at Arnhem noted that each individual chimp had a distinct personality, and that some were more trustworthy than others.

> Chimpanzees seem to understand that there are **social rules** they are expected to follow.
> They do not always do so,
>   and the violation of group norms, or the defying of authority,
>   is accompanied by what seem to be **feelings of guilt or embarrassment**.

> Human beings and chimpanzees were both descended from an ancestral ape,
>   and both modern chimpanzees and human beings,
>   especially those living in hunter-gatherer or other relatively primitive societies,
>   display similar forms of social behavior.
> Human sociability is not a historical or cultural acquisition,
>   but something hardwired into human nature.

through genetic inheritance

## 2.2 Specifically Human

### 2.2.1 cognitive abilities distinguish humans from chimps

> What else is contained in that 1 percent of DNA that distinguishes human beings from their chimp-like forebears?

better memory and cognitive abilities
which led to capability of deep logical inference
and ability to generalize phenomenological studies into repeatedly verifiable theories (Postivism).

then able to predict and weight the likelihood of potential outcomes of actions
, which is not based on direct observation/experience stored in memory

> In the five million years since the Homo line broke off from the human-chimp ancestor, the size of brain tripled, an extraordinarily fast development in evolutionary terms.
> The growing size of a woman's birth canal could barely keep up with the need to accommodate the enormous heads with which human infants are born.

physical adaption to support drastic improvement in human being's cognitive abilities

> At first glance, it may appear that cognitive abilities were required for human beings to adapt to and master their physical environments.
> Greater intelligence offers advantages with regard to hunting, gathering, making tools, surviving harsh climates, and the like.
> But this explanation is unsatisfying since many other species also hunt, gather, and use tools without having developed anything like a human being's cognitive abilities.

### 2.2.2 origin of human evolution, cooperation and competition in Nash equilibrium

> Many evolutionary biologists have speculated that the human brain grew as rapidly as it did for a different reason:
>   to be able to cooperate and compete with other human beings.
> Richard Alexander have separately suggested that
>   human beings in effect entered into an arms race with one another,
>   the winners of which were those groups that could
>   create more complex forms of social organization based on new cognitive abilities
>   to interpret each other's behavior.

Cooperation and competition is the primary factor that drove our monkey-like ancestors into what we are today.

> Game theory suggests that individuals who interact with one another repeatedly tend to
>   gravitate toward cooperation with those who have shown themselves to be honest and reliable,
>   and shun those who have behaved opportunistically.

> Chimpanzees can achieve a band level of social organization of a few dozen individual
>   because they possess some of the cognitive skills required
>   to solve basic repeated **prisoner's lemma games**.

to optimize resource distribution at group level

> For example,
>   Puist in the Arnhem Zoo was shunned by other chimps because of her history of unreliable behavior,
>   while Mama achieved leadership status due to her reputation for impartiality in mediating disputes.
> Chimps thus have sufficient memory and communication skills to interpret and predict each other's likely behavior, out of which evolve leadership and cooperation.

### 2.2.3 language, social learning / knowledge sharing, abstract thinking, causal inference

> But chimps are unable to move to higher levels of social organization because they do not have **language**.
> Having language means that knowledge of who was honest and who deceitful
>   no longer depends on direct experience
>   but can be passed on to others as **social knowledge**.

[social learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_learning_theory)

> [The universal decay of collective memory and attention](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-018-0474-5)
> Our results reveal that 
> - biographies remain in our communicative memory the longest (20–30 years)
> - and music the shortest (about 5.6 years).

> But language can also be the medium for lying and deceit.
> Any social group that evolved a slightly better cognitive capability to use and interpret language, and therefore to detect lying, achieved advantages over its competitors.

> The evolutionary strategies of men and women create strong incentives for deceit and the detection of qualities signaling reproductive fitness.
> Male reproductive strategy maximizes success by seeking out as many sexual partners as possible,
>   while the female reproductive strategy involves harboring the resources of the fittest male for her offspring.
> Since these strategies work at cross-purposes, the argument goes,
>   there is a strong evolutionary incentive to develop capacities for outwitting the partner,
>   in which language plays a large role.

evolutionary incentive to develop cognitive abilities,
is not just from survival pressure from other species,
but rooted in intro-species competitions between tribes, genders, etc.

language empowers us to share information across a large, extensive geographical landscape.
the drive to store more information in our heads (without other media like paper or even electron, we are the only type of containers) raised the chance for offspring of those who had better memory to survive

ability to manipulate and distort information encoded by languages transmitting though different media naturally leads to the creation of cryptography.

> The development of language not only permits the short-term coordination of action but also opens up the possibility of **abstraction and theory**, critical cognitive faculties that are unique to human beings.
> Words can refer to **concrete objects** as well as to **abstract classes** of objects (dogs, trees) and to abstractions that refer to invisible forces (Zeus, gravity).
> Putting the two together makes possible mental models,
>   that is, general statements about **causation**.
> All human beings engage in the construction of abstract mental models; our ability to theorize in this fashion gives us huge survival advantages.
> Despite the fact that correlation does not imply causation,
> human beings are constantly observing **correlations** between events in the world around them and **inferring causation** from them.

### 2.2.4 religion, ritual, cooperation in larger scale

> The ability to create mental models and to attribute causality to invisible abstractions is in turn the basis for the emergence of **religion**.
> Religion
> , or the belief in an invisible, **supernatural order**
> , exists in all human societies.
> It is a source of social cohesion that
>   permits human beings to cooperate far more widely and securely than they would
>   if they were the simple rational and self-interested agents posited by the economists.

> Those agents playing repeated prisoner’s dilemma games with one another should be able to arrive at some degree of social cooperation, as we have seen.
> But as the economist Mancur Olson has shown, collective action begins to break down as the size of the cooperating group increases.

Attractors (balance state achieved by natural/random cooperation) of a dynamic system under game theory's assumption would not scale to a large extend as the global division of labor we see today.

reason:

> In large groups
> , it becomes harder and harder to monitor the individual contributions of members
> ; free riding and other forms of opportunistic behavior become much more common.

How religion strengthen the ties between self-interested agents:

> Religion solves this collective action problem by
>   presenting rewards and punishments that greatly reinforce the gains from cooperation in the here and now.

similar to government polices and laws in secular societies nowadays

> If I believe that my tribe’s chief is just another fellow like me following his own self-interests, I may or may not decide to obey his authority.
> But if I believe that the chief can command the spirits of dead ancestors to reward or punish me, I will be much more likely to respect his word.
> Even if I am skeptical that the chief is really in touch with dead ancestors, I may not want to take the risk that he really is.

consensus (mutual believes) among a larger crowd
- heretical believers will be exiled or eliminated from the crowd

Religion still works today in India and many middle east countries as a major source of nation-level consensus
- when languages, races, organizations are too diversified

> Religion’s functional role in
>   **strengthening norms**
>   and **buttressing communities** has long been recognized.

> Religion is not the only way that ideas can reinforce group solidarity
> , today we have nationalism
>   and secular ideologies like Marxism as well
> , but in early societies it played a critical role in making possible more complex forms of social organization.

> From a cognitive point of view, any given religious belief can be described as **a type of mental model of reality**
> , in which causality is attributed to invisible forces that exist in a metaphysical realm beyond the phenomenal world of everyday experience.

> **Ritual** in turn helps to **delineate** communities, marking their boundaries and distinguishing them from one another.

one basic constitute of religious hierarchy

> Because of its role in building **social solidarity**, ritual can become disconnected from the cognitive theory that led to its creation, as in the **Christmas celebrations** that contemporary secular Europeans continue to observe.
> They no longer represent a mental model or theory that can be discarded when a better one comes along, but become ends of action in themselves.

ritual ~ materalized form of conceptual belief/action

## 2.3 The Beast with Red Cheeks
> But religious beliefs are never held by their adherents to be simple theories that can be discarded if proved wrong; they are held to be **unconditionally true**, and there are usually heavy social and psychological penalties attached to asserting their falsehood.

> Mental models and norms that help human beings cooperate and thus survive may be generated rationally, as the economists assert.
> One of the great cognitive advances offered by modern natural science is to give us a systematic empirical means for testing theories, which allows us to manipulate our environment more successfully.

### 2.3.1 human beings are emotional

> Why human beings saddle themselves with theoretical constructs that are so rigid and hard to change?
> Rule following for human beings is not primarily a rational process but one that is grounded in the emotions.

people make irrational decisions (by instinct, simplest form of empirical pattern matching, to preserve limited mental resource) and justify them afterward

[The Truth About Why We Have Emotions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CuL7A_zmqD0)
> emotion is a primitive mechanism to weight/evaluate choices

analogy to RNN encoder-decoder
- input: perception/signals from multiple body sensors
  - visual ~ CNN
  - auditory
  - tactile
    - pressure
      - touch (low)
      - pain (high)
      - vibration (periodic)
    - temperature
  - proprioceptive
  - olfactory
  - gustatory
- encoder: pre-instinct, input -> context embedding
- context embedding: emotion
- decoder:
  - post-instinct, emotion -> "action"
    - empirical pattern matrix/network
  - rationality, emotion -> logical inference
    - -> "action"
    - -> emotion (feedback loop)
- output: "action" (not formally defined yet)

examples:

> 1. When a nursing mother sees an infant, she lactates, not because she consciously thins to herself that her child needs food, but because her brain to order the production of certain hormones that in turn trigger lactation.
> 2. Gratitude for a kindness done by a stranger, and anger at a gratuitous harm, are neither calculated responses nor emotions that are necessarily learned
>   (though they can be reinforced or suppressed through practice).
> 3. When someone shows us disrespect by belittling us in front of our friends, or making comments about our mother's or sister's virtue
> , we don't launch into a mental calculation about the accuracy of the comment or how need to defend our reputation for the sake of future transaction
> . We just get anger and try to slug the person who disrespected us.

> These actions
> -- altruism toward generic ken
> , defense of one's reputation
> -- can be explained in terms of rational self-interest
> , but they are lived as emotional states.

rational reasoning is of explanatory power afterward but not playing a primary role when we make those quick reactions based off instinct

> In **average** circumstances
> , the emotional reaction produces the rationally correct response
> , which is why the evolutionary process has **programmed** human beings to react in this fashion.
> But since the action is more often the product of the emotions than calculation
> , we often get things wrong and slug someone even though he's bigger and likely to retaliate.

most of human decisions are repetitive and whose complexity is intrinsically simple


### 2.3.2 emotional mechanism makes human beings norm-following animals

> These emotional responses make human beings conformist, norm-following animals.
> While the specific content of norms is culturally determined
> , the faculties for norm following are genetically based
> , just as languages vary across cultures while being rooted in a universal human faculty for language.

Example, embarrassment:

> All human beings feel the emotion of embarrassment when they are seen violating a norm or rule followed by their peers.
> Embarrassment is clearly not a learned behavior, since children are often far more easily embarrassed than their parents by small failures to follow the rules.

> Human beings are able to put themselves in the position of other people and to observe their own behavior through the eyes of others.

> Norm following is embedded in human nature via the specific emotions of anger, shame, guilt, and pride.

Examples:

> We feel anger when a norm is violated
> , such as when a stranger goes out of his way to disparage us
> , or when a religious ritual shared by our group is mocked or neglected.
> We fell shame when we ourselves fail to live up to the norm.
> We fell pride when we have the approbation of the community for achieving a collectively valued goal.

### 2.3.3 meta-norms

> Human beings also invest emotion in meta-norms
> , norms about how to properly formulate and enforce norms
> , and can display what the biologist Robert Trivers labels "moralistic aggression" when proper meta-norms are not carried out.

Example:

> They want to see that "justice is done"
> , even when they have no direct self-interest in the outcome of a particular case.
> This explains the extraordinary popularity of crime shows and courtroom dramas on television, and the often obsessive attention with which people follow certain high-profile scandals or crimes.

### 2.3.4 pros and cons of norm-following

Pros

> Economists argue that **blindly following** rules can be emotionally rational
> , since calculating optimal outcomes in every situation
>   is often costly and counterproductive.

> The fact that
>     we become attached to certain rules
>     not as means to short-term goals
>     but as ends in themselves
>   greatly enhances the **stability** of social life.

Cons

> The problem this poses for politics is that
>   rules that have a clear utility when applied over a large number of cases
>   may not be useful under specific **short-run** circumstances
>   and frequently become dysfunctional when the conditions that gave rise to them **change**.

> Institutional rules are "sticky" and resistant to change
> , which is one of the chief sources of **political decay**.

## 2.4 the Struggle for Recognition

> When norms are invested with intrinsic meaning, they become objects of what the philosopher Georg W. F. Hegel called the "struggle for recognition".

> The desire for recognition is fundamentally different from the desire for material resources that underlies economic behavior.
> 1. Recognition is not a good that can be consumed.
>    Rather, it is an intersubjective state of mind by which one human being 
>    acknowledges the worth or status of another human being
>    , or of that human being's gods, customs, and beliefs.
> 2. Since human beings organize themselves into social hierarchies
>    , recognition is usually of relative rather than absolute worth.
>    - conflict is zero sum rather than positive sum
>      , there is no win-win situation as in trade.
>      One person's recognition can come only at the expense of the dignity of someone else.

for statement 2,
- the total amount of recognition (similar to happiness), if measurable somehow, is not static nor bounded
  - if assume the amount of recognition is bounded within a group/organization/tribe, then one way to raise the amount is to create more groups
    - globally, this might increase the network's connectivity and make it better distributed
